---
title: 3. Ground
slug: OKKK_GND
---
The section outlines the Standard Operating Procedures for Ground Operations at Kuwait International Airport (OKKK)

## 3.1 General Provisions

Kuwait Ground **(OKBK_GND)** or Surface Movement Control **(SMC)** is responsible for managing surface operations at Kuwait International Airport. The SMC controller’s callsign for radio communication and coordination is “KUWAIT GROUND.” Their primary duties include overseeing aircraft pushback, engine startup, repositioning, and taxiing on the airport’s surface.

The SMC controller plays a crucial role in ensuring safe and efficient ground operations. This involves coordinating movements to prevent congestion on taxiways and managing the flow of traffic during busy periods. If necessary, proactive measures such as holding aircraft at the gate may be employed to optimize the sequencing of departures and maintain overall operational efficiency.


## 3.2 Designated Areas of Responsibility

Kuwait Ground is responsible for all movement areas on the apron and taxiways up to the holding points, excluding the runway and immediate runway exit taxiways.

Handoffs between SMC and TWR should be executed seamlessly to allow continuous taxi movement, minimizing the need for aircraft to stop. Top down control is applicable here. If Delivery (DLC) is offline, SMC will assume its responsibilities for clearance delivery.

---

## 3.4 Push-back Procedures

Aircraft handed over from the Ground Movement Planner (GMP) should be fully ready for pushback, having reached their Target Off-Block Time (TOBT). If no obstructions are present, they will be cleared to push back immediately.

::::caution Remember
If an aircraft requesting pushback has an **incorrect transponder code**, they must be instructed to squawk the correct code before proceeding.
::::
Pushback clearances are issued by the Ground Movement Controller (GMC). The direction for pushback is determined primarily by the aircraft's location, runway configuration, and the flow direction of the apron.

### 3.4.1 Standard Pushback

This is the default type of push back which will normally have the aircraft stop abeam the adjacent stand.

Phraseology:

>Pilot: KAC411, Stand 72, requesting Pushback.

>SMC: KAC411, Push and Start approved, face South, Runway 33L

### 3.4.2 Short Pushback

>Pilot: MSC404, Stand 24, requesting Pushback.

>SMC: MSC404, Short Push and Start approved, face South, Runway 33L

### 3.4.3  Long Pushback

>Pilot: KAC303, Stand 66, requesting Pushback.

>SMC: KAC303, Long Pushback and Startup approved, to finish abeam Stand 72 face South, Runway 33L

### 3.4.4 Conditional Pushback

During high traffic volume, conditional pushback instructions may be issued when an aircraft is taxing behind another traffic aircraft awaiting pushback. This approach ensures a safe cordination and efficient taxiway movement. Whenever applicable, a controller is encouraged to use conditional pushback, as it saves radio time and simplifies the workload.

>Pilot: KAC303, Stand 66, requesting Pushback.

>SMC: KAC303, Behind the company B777, Pushback and Startup approved, face South, Runway 33L

## 3.5 Departure Taxi Procedures
Departures should be given taxi for a full length departure (unless otherwise requested)
to their assigned runway. The QNH should also be provided at this stage.

Be aware of the situation on the intersecting taxiways (W14, E8, E9, W13/W9/W20) and
ensure the taxiways remain segregated by direction (i.e. one for eastbound and one for
westbound taxi).

Transfer of communications from SMC to Tower should be expeditious in order to
enhance departure rates

## 3.6 Arrival Taxi Procedures
Arriving aircraft shall immediately be handed off by TWR after clear of the holding point and be instructed to Hold Short of Taxiway W1. SMC shall assign an arrival stand when they are on final approach.

Once the aircraft is handed off to SMC they may be taxied to their stand.

### 3.6.1 Stand Allocation Procedure

Ground Radar Plugin is used to automatically assign parking positions according to the aircraft type and operator according to the table below.

Aircraft parking on Apron 3 are not required to park on marked bays and thus should simply be instructed to taxi to Apron 3 via W13 or W14 (do not assign a specific
parking position).

Manual assignments may be done where appropriate (or on request), however ATC should be aware of the size of the aircraft and the parking position’s capacity.



| **Airline**        	| **Stands**      	|
|--------------------	|-----------------	|
| KAC                	|      79-71      	|
| KAC Overflow       	|    66-63,50B    	|
| JZR                	|     127-139     	|
| JZR Overflow       	| 506,508,510,512 	|
| Other PAX Airlines 	|    1-5,21-26    	|
| CARGO              	|     501-554     	|
| GA APRON           	|     G1-G29B     	|
| ROYAL APRON        	|      T1-T3      	|

### 3.6.2 Taxiways and Stand Restrictions
Taxiways W10 and W7 are restricted to aircraft weight category C and below.

### 3.6.3 A380 Specific Procedures
Aircraft type A380 are subject to the following regulations:
- Vacate at the end of runway (from 33L, 15R or 15L) or at E9 (from 33R)
- Park on stand 26 (if available)
- Do not taxi via W7, W8, W10 or W13

---

## 3.7 Low-Visibility Procedures (LVP)
When LVO is in force, all departing aircraft must depart from the full-length runway entrances. Controllers are required to change their Ground Radar mode to LVP. To do so, click where it will by default say ‘Normal’.

Pilots need additional guidance and information when taxiing during periods of reduced visibility. The view from the cockpit of the aircraft is very limited. Therefore, taxi instructions and essential traffic information should be passed clearly and concisely.

Taxiing aircraft should be routed in a way to ensure a simple one-way traffic flow is maintained. In LVP, during CAT II/III conditions, aircraft shall be routed in accordance
with the Low Visibility Procedure taxi routes.

As no ground markings indicate the holding positions on the taxiway E1 for runway 33R/15L CAT II operations and on W1 for 15R. The following holding positions shall be used as holding positions during CAT II operations:
- On taxiway E1 between taxiway E2 and first loop (not main loop) 33R.
- On taxiway E1 between taxiway E5 and first loop (not main loop); on taxiway E8 short of taxiway E1; or on taxiway E9 short of taxiway E1, 15L.
- On taxiway W1 between taxiway W5 & taxiway W18, 15R.