---
title: 5. VFR Procedures
slug: OKKK_VFR
---
The section outlines the Standard Operating Procedures for VFR Operations at Kuwait International Airport (OKKK)

---

## 5.1 Outbound VFR Traffic

VFR departures should be given departure instructions, including turn directions and leg to exit the circuit (if appropriate), and altitude.
Circuits shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: VFR aircraft shall be assigned an SSR code and taxied to their assigned runway (with concurrence of Tower) and shall receive departure instructions from Tower prior to departure.

Aircraft may request either touch and go, a stop and go, a low approach, or a full stop.

Once the Tower Controller is aware of the aircraft’s intentions within the control zone, they may be sequenced to the runway, with due consideration given to runway occupancy time.

The following information should be provided prior to joining the circuit:
- Leg to join;
- Expected runway;
- Sequence;
- Any applicable traffic information

## 5.2 Inbound VFR Traffic
Inbound VFR aircraft shall be sent to ADC with enough time such that two-way radio communications have been established before aircraft receive clearance to enter the aerodrome control zone.

On initial contact, ADC will pass the instructions for joining the circuit, as well as any other pertinent information such as traffic information with the sector.

During times of heavy IFR arrival activity, VFR arrivals may be denied entry into the control zone and instructed to hold outside of the CTR awaiting further instructions. Once a slot has been coordinated with the radar controllers, VFR arrivals may proceed, however, the estimated delay must be given to the pilot.
