---
title: 2. Delivery
slug: OBBIDEL
---
The section outlines the Standard Operating Procedures for Delivery Operations at Bahrain International Airport (OBBI)

## 2.1 General Provisions
Bahrain Clearance **(OBBI_DEL)** or Delivery Clearance **(DLV)** is responsible for validating flight plans and issuing IFR/VFR clearances to departing aircraft. This includes thoroughly reviewing the filed route, assigned altitude, and departure procedure to ensure accuracy. If any discrepancies, errors, or invalid information are detected, the controller must correct them before issuing the final clearance.

In addition to route validation, the Delivery Controller plays a key role in managing taxiway operations. To reduce delays and congestion during periods of high departure activity, proactive measures such as holding aircraft at the gate may be implemented to conserve fuel and optimize the flow of outbound traffic on the taxiways.

---

## 2.2 Departure Clearance

### 2.2.1 General
DLV is responsible for issuing clearance for departing aircraft. Pilots may be expected to report the following information on first contact:
- Callsign
- Aircraft Type
- Parking Stand
- Destination
- Requested Flight Level

### 2.2.2 Information contained in a departure clearance
An IFR clearance shall be in the following format:
- Callsign
- Airway and Bahrain FIR exit point
- Initially cleared altitude
- Assigned SSR code

### 2.2.3 Phraseology
::::info Note
"A GulfAir flight to Dubai International Airport will be used as an example going forward for the phraseology."
::::

**Pilot:**
> "Bahrain Delivery, Good Evening, GFA512, Type B789, Stand 18, Request IFR Clearance to Dubai International as filed."

**Controller:**
> "GFA512, Bahrain Delivery, Good Evening. Cleared to Dubai, radar vectors N697 SODAK, then P559 NALPO, maintain altitude 4000ft, Squawk 4411"

::::caution Remember
"DLV shall obtain a full readback of the clearance. If the pilot does not report the current ATIS letter on first contact, DLV shall pass the current ATIS letter and QNH."
::::

**Pilot:**
> "Cleared to Dubai International FL250 via N697 SODAK, Expect Radar Vectors after departure, maintain altitude 4000ft, Squawk 4411, GFA512"

**Controller:**
> "GFA512, Readback Correct, Information Alpha, QNH 998 Hecto-Pascals, Report ready for Pushback and Startup"

**Pilot:**
> "Information A, QNH 998 Hecto-Pascals, Will Report ready for Pushback and Startup, GFA512"

::::caution Remember
Departing aircraft must remain on the delivery frequency and report when ready for pushback before being handed off to the Surface Movement Controller (SMC). This allows aircraft to be held at the gate, following the procedures outlined in Section 2.6.
::::

**Pilot:**
> “Ready for Pushback, GFA512”

**Controller:**
> “GFA512, HOLD Position, Contact Ground 121.850.”

**Pilot:**
> “WILCO Ground 121.850, GFA512”

---

### 2.3 Datalink Clearance
Clearance for aircraft may also be provided via DCL, which helps reduce controller workload and frequency congestion. For aircraft equipped with the necessary systems, this will be delivered through the onboard ACARS system. Controllers must ensure that DCL is available for use at all times.

---

### 2.4 Aircraft requiring a reroute
Aircraft requiring a reroute shall not be given PDC/DCL. Instead, a voice clearance must be used. This shall be communicated to the pilot appropriately.

---

### 2.5 Departure Procedures
Bahrain International does not have any published SIDs. Instead, TWR will assign an initial heading to departing aircraft and APP will provide radar vectors enroute afterwards. Therefore, DLV will only inform the pilot in the clearance that radar vectors will be provided after departure.

The initial climb is 3000ft for propeller aircraft and helicopters and 4000ft for jet aircraft.

---

### 2.6 Requested cruising level
Aircraft routes out of the aerodrome must comply with all routing and level restrictions. This is based on direction and type of flight.
| **Destination** | **Restriction** |
|:---------------:|:---------------:|
|       OM**      |    Max FL 250   |
|       OKKK      |    Max FL 260   |
|       OOSH      |    Max FL 230   |
|  OTHH/OTBD/OTBH |   Max 11000 ft  |

---

## 2.7 Delay mitigation
### 2.7.1 Calculated Take-Off time (CTOT)

During periods of high intensity departure activity, aircraft shall be assigned a Calculated Take-Off Time (CTOT), either automatically or manually. The CTOT is always a minimum of 30 minutes from the present time.
Using CTOT, DLV shall plan the departure sequence that maximises runway utilisation and results in the least average departure delay while considering direction of flight, wake turbulence category of aircraft and any other relevant consideration.

### 2.7.2 Target off-block time (TOBT)

The target off-block time is the time the aircraft is expected to push back in order to meet the CTOT.
Usually around 20 minutes prior to CTOT is a good estimate but depending on the location of the
aircraft stand in relation to the runway, it might be shorter or longer. Aircraft reporting ready before
their TOBT should be instructed to hold position and they should be told the sequence to expect.

**Example:**
>”FDB53, HOLD POSITION. NUMBER 3 FOR STARTUP, EXPECT PUSHBACK AT TIME 45”